

Organisation of the document
############################

This document is organised according to the :term:`TCP/IP` reference model and follows a top-down approach. Most of the first networking textbooks chose a bottom-up approach, i.e. they first explained all the electrical and optical details of the physical layer then moved to the datalink layer, ... This approach worked well during the infancy of computer networks and until the late 1990s. At that time, most students were not users of computer networks and it was useful to explain computer networks by building the corresponding protocols from the simplest in the physical layer up to the application layer. Today, all students are active users of Internet applications and starting to learn computer networking by looking at bits is not very motivating. Starting from [KuroseRoss09]_, many textbooks and teachers have chosen a top-down approach. This approach starts from the applications such as email and web that students already know and explores the different layers starting from the application layer. This approach works pretty well with today's students.

.. sidebar:: Top-down versus bottom-up

   The traditional bottom-up approach could be in fact considered as an engineering approach since it starts from the simple network that allows to exchange bits and explains how to combine different protocols and mechanisms to build the most complex applications. The top-down approach could on the other hand be considered as a scientific approach. Like biologists, it starts from an existing (man-built) system and explores it layer by layer.

Besides the top-down versus bottom-up organisation, computer networking books can aim at having an in-depth coverage of a small number of topics or at having a limited coverage of a wide range of topics. Covering a wide range of topics is interesting for introductory courses or for students who do not need a detailed knowledge of computer networks. It allows the students to learn a `little about everything` and then start from this basic knowledge later if they need to understand computer networking in more details. This books chose to cover in details a smaller number of topics than other textbooks. This is motivated by the fact that computer networks are often pushed to their limits and understanding the details of the main networking protocols is important to be able to fully grasp how a network behaves or extend it to provide innovative services. As the popular quote says, `the devil is in the details` and this quote is even more important in computer networking where the change of a single bit may have huge consequences. In computer networks, understanding *all* the details is, unfortunately for some students, sometimes necessary.

The overall objective of the book is to explain the principles and the protocols used in computer networks and also provide the students with some intuition about the important practical issues that arise often. The course follows a hybrid problem-based learning (:term:`PBL`) approach. During each week, the students follow a 2 hours theoretical course that describes the principles and some of the protocols. They also receive a set of small problems that they need to solve in groups. These problems are designed to reinforce the student's knowledge but also to explore the practical problems that arise in real networks by allowing the students to perform experiments by writing prototype networking code. Most of the prototype code will be written in python_ by using the scapy_ packet injection/manipulation framework that will be described later.

.. sidebar:: Why open source ?

   This book is being developed as an open-source book under a creative commons licence. This choice an an open-source license is motivated by two reasons. The first is that we hope that this will allow many students to use the book to learn computer networks and maybe other teachers will reuse, adapt and improve it. The second reason is that that the computer networking community heavily relies on open source implementations. In fact, there are high-quality and widely used open-source implementations for most of the protocols described in this book. This includes the TCP/IP implementations that are part of linux_, freebsd_ or the uIP_ stack running on 8bits controllers, but also servers such as bind_, unbound_, apache_ or sendmail_ and implementations of routing protocols such as xorp_ or quagga_ . Furthermore, the official specifications of most of the protocols that are described in this book have been developed within the IETF_ in an almost open-source manner. The IETF publishes its protocols specifications in the publicly available RFC_ and new proposals are described in `Internet drafts`_.  

The book is organised as follows. We first describe the application layer. Given the large number of Internet-based applications, it is of course impossible to cover them all in details. Instead we focus on three types of Internet-based applications. We first study the Domain Name System (DNS) and then explain some of the protocols involved in the exchange of electronic mail. The discussion of the application layer ends with a description of the key protocols of the world wide web and a brief explanation of peer-to-peer applications. All these applications rely on the transport layer. This is a key layer in today's networks as it contains all the mechanisms that are necessary to provide a reliable delivery of data over an unreliable network. We cover the transport layer by first developing a simple reliable transport layer protocol and then explain the details of the TCP and UDP protocols used in TCP/IP networks. After the transport layer, we focus on the network layer. This is also a very important layer as it is responsible for the delivery of packets from any source to any destination through intermediate routers. In the network layer, we describe the two possible organisations of the network layer and the routing protocols based on link-state and distance vectors. Then we explain in details the IPv4, IPv6, RIP, OSPF and BGP protocols that are actually used in today's Internet. The last part of the course is devoted to the datalink layer. More precisely, our focus in this part is on the Local area networks. We first describe the Medium Access Control mechanisms that allow multiple hosts to share a given transmission medium. We consider both opportunistic and deterministic techniques. We explain in details two types of LANs that are important from a deployment viewpoint today : Ethernet and WiFi. 

.. include:: ../links.rst
